








DHW 502 Determinants of Health and Wellbeing in New-Zealand  
Table of Contents
Assessment Task - 1	3
Assessment 1.1	3
Assessment 1.2	3
Assessment 1.3	4
Assessment 1.4	5
Assessment Task - 2	6
Assessment 2.1	6
Determinants of Health for Obesity	6
Determinants of Health for Mental Health Disorders	7
Assessment 2.2	8
Obesity in Māori and Pacific Populations	8
Mental Health Disorders in Youth/Adolescents and the LGBTQ+ Community	8
Assessment Task 3	11
Assessment 3.1	11
Health Inequities in Māori Population	11
Health Inequities in Pacific Islander Population	11
Assessment: 3.2	12
Māori Population	12
Pacific Islander Population	14
References	17

 
Assessment Task - 1
Assessment 1.1 
1. Morbidity Statistics - These numbers tell us how many people have different diseases injuries or health problems in a population. This helps us understand how much illness and disability people are dealing with which is important for planning healthcare and where to spend resources (Kim, et al., 2020). We look at things like how many people have long-term diseases (like diabetes or heart problems) how many get sick from infectious diseases (like the flu or HIV) and how many have mental health issues. By studying these statistics the people who make healthcare decisions can figure out how to prevent diseases catch them early and treat them to make everyone healthier.
2. Mortality Rates - These rates tell us how many people have died in a certain period. We look at them based on factors like age gender ethnicity and the reasons for the deaths. By keeping an eye on these rates we can spot trends and differences in health among different groups and areas that need special attention (Culp, et al., 2020). For example, if we track how many babies are dying it helps us see if our healthcare for moms and kids is working well. And if we watch how older people are dying it can show us if there are problems with diseases that affect older folks.
Assessment 1.2 
Mental Health Disorders - Mental health disorders are another big problem in New Zealand. These are conditions like feeling sad all the time (depression) or being super worried (anxiety). Lately, more and more people in New Zealand have been feeling this way (Yao, et al., 2020). The COVID-19 pandemic made it worse because it made people more stressed and alone. Mental health disorders don't just affect one person; they affect their families and the whole community. They make it hard to feel good and work well.
Sometimes people don't get help for mental health problems because they're afraid others will treat them badly or think they're strange. New Zealand has been trying to help with mental health by spending more money on mental health services and telling people it's okay to ask for help. But we still need to do more to make sure everyone can get help early when they need it and to support those who are going through tough times.
Obesity – Obesity is a big health problem in New Zealand. It's when people are very overweight. In New Zealand, many people are too heavy and it's one of the worst in developed countries. Obesity doesn't just make people physically sick; it also makes them feel bad mentally affects how they get along with others and causes money problems. When you're very overweight you're more likely to get diseases like diabetes heart problems and certain cancers which can make life hard.
Being obese also puts extra pressure on the healthcare system because it takes up a lot of resources that could be used for other things (Popkin, et al., 2020). Plus it can make people treat you badly or look down on you which can make you feel even worse about yourself. To fix obesity in New Zealand we need to do many things like teaching people to eat better encouraging them to move more and dealing with issues like not having enough good food or money to buy it.
Both obesity and mental health problems are big deals in New Zealand. Fixing them means doing many things like giving people good healthcare teaching them about these issues getting communities to help and changing some rules to make life healthier and happier for everyone.
Assessment 1.3
 Obesity - In New Zealand many people are overweight and it's a big health problem. Around 32% of adults and 11% of kids were very overweight in 2019/2020. These numbers have been going up which is worrying. Some groups like Māori and Pasifika communities are more affected because they tend to eat unhealthy food not move around much and don't always have access to good food. Obesity costs a lot of money for healthcare and makes people less productive and unhappy. The government is trying to help by promoting healthy eating and making better food choices easier.
Mental Health Disorders - Mental health problems are a big deal in New Zealand too. Lots of people here feel sad or anxious. In 2018 about one in four adults had these issues mostly depression and anxiety. This is a big worry, especially for young people. About 15% of high school students thought about hurting themselves in the past year (Bell, et al., 2019). The COVID-19 pandemic made things worse with more people feeling stressed worried and sad. Sometimes it's hard to get help for mental health problems and you might have to wait a long time for treatment. The government is trying to make it easier for people to get help and has a plan to stop suicides.
Both obesity and mental health problems are serious and the government is trying to do things to make people healthier and happier. If you want the latest numbers and what's being done it's a good idea to check more recent sources since my last update in September 2021.
Assessment 1.4 
Obesity
•	Māori Population - In New Zealand Māori adults are more likely to be very overweight. This is because of factors like not having enough money for healthy food and historical events like colonization. Also, their traditional diets have changed over time making it more likely for them to become obese.
•	Pasifika Communities - People from the Pacific Islands living in New Zealand also have high rates of obesity. This is because of their cultural food choices not always having access to fresh and affordable food and some people's jobs and education not being good enough.
Mental Health Disorders
•	Youth and Adolescents - Young people in New Zealand especially those aged 15 to 24 have a higher chance of feeling sad or anxious. This happens because they have to do well in school deal with friends and family and figure out who they are. The COVID-19 pandemic made things even harder for them.
•	LGBTQ+ Communities - People who are LGBTQ+ (lesbian gay bisexual transgender queer/questioning) in New Zealand often have more mental health problems. This is because some people treat them badly or keep them away and they might be afraid to ask for help from doctors or counselors. It's important for healthcare providers to understand their needs and be inclusive.
Both obesity and mental health problems are a big deal for these groups in New Zealand. We need to help them in special ways to make sure they're healthier and happier.

 
Assessment Task - 2
Assessment 2.1 
Determinants of Health for Obesity
	Money and Lifestyle - Your income affects whether you can buy healthy food or join activities (Barua & Saikia, 2023). People with less money might eat cheaper but less healthy food leading to obesity. Also, it can be hard for them to access weight management programs.
	Where You Live - In some places in New Zealand it's not easy to walk or bike because they're planned mainly for cars. But in areas with parks and safe places to walk or bike people are more likely to be active and not obese.
	Culture and Food - Different cultures have different foods. In Māori and Pacific Islander communities, some traditional foods are high in calories and sugar which can lead to obesity. Celebrations often involve lots of food making it easy to overeat.
	What's Around You - In New Zealand there are many fast-food places and ads for unhealthy food. This makes it tough for people to choose healthier options. Rules about food ads and healthier choices can help fight this.
	Education and Awareness - Knowing about healthy choices is important. People with less education might not be aware of the best foods to eat or how to stay active. Education programs can help teach them about making healthier choices.
	Family and Home Environment - What happens at home matters. If families have a lot of junk food and don't cook healthy meals it can lead to obesity, especially for kids (Younas, et al., 2021). Creating a healthy home environment with good food options can make a big difference.
	Stress - When people are stressed they might eat more unhealthy food as a way to cope. Stress can come from work family issues or other problems. Finding better ways to manage stress can help prevent obesity.
	Accessibility to Healthcare - Sometimes people can't get the help they need to manage their weight. If healthcare isn't easy to reach or affordable it can be hard to get advice or treatment for obesity.
Determinants of Health for Mental Health Disorders
	Money and Jobs - If you don't have enough money a job or a stable place to live you're more likely to have mental health problems like anxiety or depression (McKnight-Eily, et al., 2021). Not having money or support can make it hard to get help.
	Friends and Family - Having good friends and family who care about you can help keep your mental health strong. But feeling lonely having no one to talk to or having bad relationships can lead to problems like depression.
	Who You Are - Being treated badly because of your culture race or identity can hurt your mental health. For Māori and Pacific Islander communities keeping their culture while dealing with a Western healthcare system can be tough.
	Getting Help - It's important to have mental health services that you can reach easily. In New Zealand, some people have to wait a long time for help and it's not the same everywhere. To improve mental health there should be enough money and services in all areas.
	Bullying and Discrimination - Being treated badly by others like bullying or discrimination can hurt mental health. This is especially true for LGBTQ+ individuals who might face discrimination because of their identity. Stopping bullying and discrimination can improve mental well-being.
	Trauma and Life Events - Sometimes things like trauma (like a bad accident) or difficult life events (like losing a loved one) can lead to mental health issues. Providing support and counseling to those who've been through tough times is important.
	Access to Supportive Communities - Having people around who understand you and offer support is a big help for mental health (Ahmed, et al., 2020). Creating communities where people can be themselves and get help when needed can make a positive impact.
	Early Intervention and Prevention - Catching mental health problems early and preventing them from getting worse is crucial. If people can get help sooner it's easier to treat and recover from mental health disorders.
In summary, many factors influence both obesity and mental health disorders in New Zealand. These include education family environment stress accessibility to healthcare bullying trauma support from communities and early intervention. To improve the health of New Zealanders it's essential to address these determinants by promoting education creating healthy home environments managing stress reducing discrimination providing trauma support building supportive communities and offering early intervention and prevention programs. This way we can work towards a healthier and happier New Zealand for everyone.
Assessment 2.2
Obesity in Māori and Pacific Populations
	Money and Jobs - Māori and Pacific Islander people often don't have as much money or good jobs as others. This makes it hard for them to buy healthy food or have safe places to play. Imagine not being able to afford fruits and veggies or having no safe park to play in (Mack, et al., 2023). This can make people gain weight because they eat cheap unhealthy food and can't move around enough. To help we need to create more job opportunities and make healthy food cheaper and easier to get for everyone.
	Cultural Traditions - Māori and Pacific Islander cultures have special foods and traditions. But sometimes these foods have lots of calories and sugar. Think of big family celebrations with lots of tasty but not-so-healthy dishes. These traditions are important but they can also lead to overeating. We need to respect their traditions and help them make healthier choices within their culture. It's about finding a balance.
	Where You Live - Sometimes where you live can make it hard to exercise. Māori and Pacific people might not have safe places to walk or bike. Imagine if there were no sidewalks or parks in your neighborhood. It would be tough to play outside and stay active. We need to plan our neighborhoods better so everyone can walk bike or play outside safely. This means creating sidewalks bike lanes and safe parks for everyone.
	Access to Healthy Food - In some neighborhoods where Māori and Pacific people live there are many unhealthy fast food places and not enough healthy food options. Plus they see lots of ads for unhealthy food like burgers and fries. Imagine seeing these ads all the time and having nowhere nearby to buy fresh fruits and veggies. It would be hard to make healthy choices. We need to make rules about what kind of food can be advertised and make sure there are good places to buy healthy food in these neighborhoods.
Mental Health Disorders in Youth/Adolescents and the LGBTQ+ Community
	Money Stress - Some young people and LGBTQ+ individuals don't have much money which can make them feel stressed and sad. Young people might be having a hard time in school or have parents who can't find work. This can lead to a lot of stress and sadness. For LGBTQ+ people discrimination and being treated unfairly because of who they are can make them feel bad. They might be bullied or mistreated which can hurt their mental health. To help we need to make sure everyone has a chance to get a good job and earn a fair income. We also need to reduce bullying and discrimination so that LGBTQ+ people can feel safe and supported.
	Friends and Support - Having friends and people who care about you is really important for mental health. Sometimes young people don't have good friends or feel alone. They might be bullied or teased which can make them feel sad and anxious. For LGBTQ+ people, not everyone accepts them and they might lose friends or even family. This can be very hard emotionally. We need to create safe and welcoming spaces for everyone so they have friends and people who support them. Reducing bullying and stigma is crucial for young people and LGBTQ+ individuals.
	Discrimination - Discrimination means treating someone unfairly because of who they are. Some LGBTQ+ people experience this and it can make them feel bad about themselves. They might be treated poorly because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. This can be very hurtful. Māori and Pacific youth may also experience discrimination because of their background or ethnicity and this can impact their mental health too. To help we need to make sure that everyone is treated with respect no matter who they are. We also need mental health services that understand their cultural needs and are sensitive to their experiences.
	Getting Help - Sometimes it's hard for young people or LGBTQ+ individuals to get help for their mental health. They might have to wait a long time to see a doctor or counselor. This can be frustrating and make their problems worse. Imagine if you had to wait months to see a doctor when you were feeling really down. It would be tough. To help we need to make sure mental health services are easy to access and people don't have to wait too long to get the help they need. This means having enough mental health professionals available and making sure they are trained to understand the unique needs of different communities including LGBTQ+ individuals.
In conclusion, when we look at obesity and mental health problems in these groups of people in New Zealand we see that many things can affect their health. It's not just about eating right or talking to a counselor. It's also about having money feeling accepted and having safe places to be yourself. To make things better we need to create more opportunities reduce discrimination and make sure everyone can get the support they need. This way we can improve the health and well-being of Māori Pacific Islanders young people and LGBTQ+ individuals in New Zealand.

 
Assessment Task 3
Assessment 3.1
 Health Inequities in Māori Population
	Life Expectancy and Mortality Rates - Māori people tend to live shorter lives and have a higher chance of passing away than non-Māori (Hobbs, et al., 2019). This happens because they are more likely to die from conditions like heart disease diabetes and some cancers. It's mainly because they don't always have the same access to healthcare and health information.
	Chronic Health Conditions - Māori adults often have more long-term health problems like obesity diabetes and high blood pressure. This is because they may not have access to healthy food safe places to exercise or good healthcare. Historical events like land loss also affect their health.
	Mental Health Disparities - Māori people experience more mental health issues like feeling very sad or anxious compared to non-Māori. This could be due to stress from discrimination or financial struggles and historical events still impact their feelings today.
	Access to Healthcare Services - Some Māori people find it hard to see a doctor or nurse when needed because they live far from healthcare clinics lack money or feel uncomfortable seeking healthcare.
	Cultural Determinants - Māori have a rich culture with special foods and practices but some may not be as healthy as they could be. They might not have access to traditional foods or healing methods (Dajani, 2020). It's important to respect and understand their culture to help them be healthy within it.
Health Inequities in Pacific Islander Population
	Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) - Pacific Islanders in New Zealand are more likely to have lasting health problems like obesity type 2 diabetes and heart disease. This might be due to limited access to healthy food and safe exercise places. Traditional Pacific Islander diets which can be high in calories and sugar also contribute.
	Tuberculosis Rates - Pacific Islanders in New Zealand have more cases of TB because they often live in crowded places and some might have had TB in their home countries. Finding and treating TB early is important for recovery.
	Mental Health Disparities - Pacific Islanders also face mental health disparities feeling sad anxious or using drugs more often. This can be due to discrimination or a lack of mental health services that understand their culture and needs.
	Access to Healthcare - Going to the doctor or nurse can be tough for Pacific Islanders especially if they don't have much money or live where healthcare services are scarce. Language can be a barrier and they may not find healthcare providers who understand their culture.
	Socioeconomic Determinants - Many Pacific Islander families may lack money and stable housing affecting their health. This can lead to food insecurity and unstable living conditions making it difficult for their children to succeed in school or secure good jobs.
To address these health inequities in both Māori and Pacific Islander populations in New Zealand we need to consider everything that affects their health such as where they live their finances and their cultural practices. We should involve these communities in finding solutions because they understand their needs best. By working together we can reduce these health disparities and ensure everyone in New Zealand has a fair chance at being healthy.
Assessment: 3.2
 Māori Population
1. Life Expectancy and Mortality Rates - The health disparities experienced by the Māori population such as a lower life expectancy and higher mortality rates can be attributed to a complex interplay of determinants of health (Arias, et al., 2021). One of the central factors contributing to these disparities is socioeconomic status. Many Māori individuals face economic hardships and limited access to education and job opportunities. These economic challenges can have a profound impact on their ability to afford healthcare and lead healthy lives. The result is that preventable conditions like heart disease and diabetes take a greater toll on Māori individuals due to delayed or inadequate medical care.
Furthermore, issues related to limited health literacy and socioeconomic disparities are instrumental in driving up the mortality rates within the Māori population. Lack of access to quality healthcare and disparities in the provision of healthcare services add to their vulnerability. This includes difficulties in accessing routine check-ups preventative care and early interventions. The consequence is that preventable health conditions are often detected at advanced stages reducing the chances of successful treatment.
2. Chronic Health Conditions - The burden of chronic health conditions among the Māori population is rooted in multiple determinants of health. Socioeconomic disparities play a pivotal role in this context (Selachius, et al., 2020). Many Māori individuals face economic hardship which restricts their ability to access healthier food options and engage in regular physical activity. The result is higher rates of obesity diabetes and hypertension among Māori adults.
Historical determinants also feature prominently in this scenario. The legacy of colonization and the subsequent loss of traditional practices and diets have left lasting impacts on the health of the Māori population. Traditional Māori diets which once were balanced and nutritious have been replaced with less healthy alternatives. This dietary shift is a reflection of both historical factors and socioeconomic constraints. As a result, Māori communities are grappling with a higher prevalence of chronic health conditions.
Cultural determinants are an essential part of this equation. While cultural practices and traditions are important they can sometimes contribute to health disparities. For instance, significant cultural events and family celebrations in Māori communities may involve the consumption of calorie-dense foods. Finding a balance between respecting and including these traditions while promoting healthier choices is a challenge that must be addressed to improve overall health outcomes.
3. Mental Health Disparities - Mental health disparities within the Māori population are multifaceted and can be traced back to various determinants. Exposure to discrimination socioeconomic disparities and the historical trauma associated with colonization and cultural dispossession are major contributors to these disparities. Discriminatory practices racism and cultural insensitivity in society can lead to profound stress anxiety and depression among the Māori population.
Access to healthcare services is yet another determinant playing a significant role in these disparities. Mistrust of the healthcare system stemming from cultural insensitivity and past injustices can result in a reluctance to seek mental health care when needed. Additionally, the availability of culturally competent mental health services remains limited further restricting access to quality care. Consequently, mental health issues are often unaddressed or undertreated within the Māori community.
4. Access to Healthcare Services - Limited access to healthcare services is a significant barrier for the Māori population. Geographic isolation transportation challenges and the affordability of healthcare contribute to the difficulties individuals face in seeking timely medical care. For those residing in remote areas accessing healthcare services often involves long journeys which can be impractical and costly.
Moreover, cultural competence and sensitivity within healthcare settings are often lacking. The absence of healthcare providers who understand and respect Māori cultural values and practices can lead to mistrust and reluctance to utilize healthcare services. This cultural disconnect can have serious consequences particularly when it comes to preventive care and early intervention. As a result, health inequities persist and certain health conditions go unaddressed until they reach more advanced stages.
Cultural Determinants - Cultural determinants including the loss of traditional Māori practices have a direct impact on health inequities. The decline in traditional practices such as the consumption of traditional foods and the use of traditional healing methods has contributed to overall health deterioration among the Māori population. Cultural revitalization efforts are crucial to address these determinants and promote holistic health for the Māori population. Preserving and reviving traditional practices while adapting them to contemporary health needs is a vital aspect of improving overall well-being.
Pacific Islander Population
1. Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) - The heightened burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) among Pacific Islanders in New Zealand is closely linked to various determinants of health. Poor dietary habits limited access to healthier food options and lower levels of physical activity contribute significantly to these disparities. Pacific Islanders are more likely to consume diets high in calories and sugar reflecting cultural preferences and availability of food choices. These dietary patterns in conjunction with socioeconomic determinants like poverty and housing instability impact overall health and access to healthcare services leading to a higher prevalence of NCDs.
2. Tuberculosis Rates - The relatively elevated rate of tuberculosis (TB) among Pacific Islanders in New Zealand can be attributed to specific determinants of health. Overcrowded living conditions often resulting from economic challenges and housing instability create an environment conducive to the spread of TB. Moreover, some individuals may have acquired latent TB infection in their countries of origin further contributing to the health issue. The lack of access to early detection and appropriate treatment exacerbates this disparity underscoring the need for improved healthcare services and access.
3. Mental Health Disparities - Mental health disparities within the Pacific Islander population are connected to various determinants (Saltzman, et al., 2021). Experiences of discrimination acculturation stress and cultural barriers to seeking mental health services all contribute to these disparities. Pacific Islanders may face challenges in accessing culturally appropriate mental health support and language barriers can further complicate the situation. Cultural factors such as stigma surrounding mental health issues can deter individuals from seeking help when needed.
4. Access to Healthcare - Limited access to healthcare services especially for those in lower-income communities is a significant determinant of health inequities among Pacific Islanders in New Zealand (Matin, et al., 2021). Language barriers limited health literacy and a lack of culturally competent healthcare providers can hinder access to quality care. For those residing in remote or underserved areas, geographic disparities exacerbate healthcare inequalities. The combination of these factors makes it challenging for Pacific Islanders to receive timely and appropriate medical care.
5. Socioeconomic Determinants - Socioeconomic determinants including poverty and housing instability play a significant role in the health inequities experienced by Pacific Islanders. Many Pacific families in New Zealand grapple with economic challenges that have far-reaching effects on their overall health and access to healthcare services (Khalatbari-Soltani, et al., 2020). Poverty can lead to food insecurity limiting access to nutritious meals. Additionally, limited access to education and employment opportunities perpetuates health disparities within this population.
The health inequities faced by both the Māori and Pacific Islander population groups in New Zealand are intricately connected to a multitude of determinants of health. These determinants encompass socioeconomic status cultural factors access to healthcare services and efforts to revive and preserve their respective cultures.
Addressing these health disparities necessitates a multifaceted approach that acknowledges the interconnectedness of these factors. Policymakers and healthcare providers should prioritize culturally sensitive healthcare improve access to healthcare services and implement educational initiatives. Efforts to reduce discrimination and stigma are also paramount. Furthermore involving the affected communities in the development and implementation of solutions is essential. By addressing these determinants comprehensively New Zealand can work towards reducing health inequities and ensuring that all its residents have a fair chance at good health.
 
References
Ahmed, S. A. S., Ajisola, M., Azeem, K., Bakibinga, P., Chen, Y. F., Choudhury, N. N., ... & Yusuf, R. (2020). Impact of the societal response to COVID-19 on access to healthcare for non-COVID-19 health issues in slum communities of Bangladesh, Kenya, Nigeria and Pakistan: results of pre-COVID and COVID-19 lockdown stakeholder engagements. BMJ global health, 5(8), e003042.
Arias, E., Tejada-Vera, B., & Ahmad, F. (2021). Provisional life expectancy estimates for January through June, 2020.
Barua, S., & Saikia, N. (2023). Perception, environmental determinants, and health complications of excess weight in India: a mixed methods approach. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 5868.
Bell, S. L., Audrey, S., Gunnell, D., Cooper, A., & Campbell, R. (2019). The relationship between physical activity, mental wellbeing and symptoms of mental health disorder in adolescents: a cohort study. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 16, 1-12.
Culp, M. B., Soerjomataram, I., Efstathiou, J. A., Bray, F., & Jemal, A. (2020). Recent global patterns in prostate cancer incidence and mortality rates. European urology, 77(1), 38-52.
Dajani, K. G. (2020). Cultural determinants in Winnicott's developmental theories. International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies, 17(1), 6-21.
Hobbs, M., Ahuriri-Driscoll, A., Marek, L., Campbell, M., Tomintz, M., & Kingham, S. (2019). Reducing health inequity for Māori people in New Zealand. The Lancet, 394(10209), 1613-1614.
Khalatbari-Soltani, S., Cumming, R. C., Delpierre, C., & Kelly-Irving, M. (2020). Importance of collecting data on socioeconomic determinants from the early stage of the COVID-19 outbreak onwards. J Epidemiol Community Health, 74(8), 620-623.
Kim, J., Thayabaranathan, T., Donnan, G. A., Howard, G., Howard, V. J., Rothwell, P. M., ... & Thrift, A. G. (2020). Global stroke statistics 2019. International Journal of Stroke, 15(8), 819-838.
Mack, M., Savila, F., Bagg, W., Harwood, M., Swinburn, B., & Goodyear-Smith, F. (2023). Interventions to prevent or manage obesity in Māori and Pacific adults: a systematic review and narrative synthesis. Ethnicity & Health, 28(4), 562-585.
Matin, B. K., Williamson, H. J., Karyani, A. K., Rezaei, S., Soofi, M., & Soltani, S. (2021). Barriers in access to healthcare for women with disabilities: a systematic review in qualitative studies. BMC women's health, 21, 1-23.
McKnight-Eily, L. R., Okoro, C. A., Strine, T. W., Verlenden, J., Hollis, N. D., Njai, R., ... & Thomas, C. (2021). Racial and ethnic disparities in the prevalence of stress and worry, mental health conditions, and increased substance use among adults during the COVID-19 pandemic—United States, April and May 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 70(5), 162.
Popkin, B. M., Du, S., Green, W. D., Beck, M. A., Algaith, T., Herbst, C. H., ... & Shekar, M. (2020). Individuals with obesity and COVID‐19: a global perspective on the epidemiology and biological relationships. Obesity reviews, 21(11), e13128.
Saltzman, L. Y., Lesen, A. E., Henry, V., Hansel, T. C., & Bordnick, P. S. (2021). COVID-19 mental health disparities. Health security, 19(S1), S-5.
Serlachius, A., Badawy, S. M., & Thabrew, H. (2020). Psychosocial challenges and opportunities for youth with chronic health conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic. JMIR Pediatrics and Parenting, 3(2), e23057.
Yao, H., Chen, J. H., & Xu, Y. F. (2020). Patients with mental health disorders in the COVID-19 epidemic. The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(4), e21.
Younas, M., Liu, C., Khalid, S., & Bakar, A. (2021). EFFECT OF HOME ENVIRONMENT ON STUDENTS'ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENTS AT HIGHER LEVEL. Ilkogretim online, 20(5).






